
[[git_gui]]
== GUI Git Front-ends

I will confess to being a long time linux and Emacs user. As such
moving from CVS and SVN to GIT and HG was pretty easy. The Emacs VCS
modes for all four systems are pretty similar and the same basic
keystrokes will work on all of them. (Which is really quite handy when
you have to switch back and forth for different projects). 

In addition I have long experience with command lines so using a unix
bash shell to get things done is not a big deal for me. Of course not
everyone will wish to work with a command line tool (or to do so for
all tasks). As such there are a number of tools for both the Mac and
Windows that can make your life easier. 

In order to be included here a package must be free and include all of
the normal git commands that you might want to use from a command
line. 

=== Emacs
==== Using Git and HG with Emacs

If you are an emacs user who has worked with other VCS systems such as
CVS or SVN in emacs then you may wish to also work with GIT or HG in
emacs. Thankfully Emacs has good integration with both git and HG. In
addition many of the same key commands work across CVS, SVN, HG and
GIT. So in all four systems the command "C-x v d" will show you which
files have changed since the last commit. (Of course what a commit
means in those four systems is not the same). 

If you are using the GIT mode in emacs there will be an addition to
the status bar that says _Git:<branch name>_. If you click on that you
will get a menu that will show you all of the various options for git
under emacs. 

In HG you sill see something similar but it will show a slightly
different status bar message. *TODO Expand*



=== Windows 
==== Tortoise GIT & HG

If you have used the Tortoise Client for CVS or SVN you will be
happy to know that they also have clients for GIT and HG. Both provide
menus in the windows explorer. 

TODO *EXPAND*




==== GitHub For windows

Github also has a great client for windows. Sporting a very nice
Windows 8 Metro theme it can be found at
link:http://windows.github.com[]. GitHub for windows will work with
Windows XP, Vista, 7 and 8. 

While setting up GIT for windows can be a pain in the neck *Github for
Windows* is an easy install. It installs a self contained git install
that will not require anything else. 

When you first install GitHub for windows it will ask you for your
github user and password. It will then setup an SSH key so that it can
connect to GitHub.

If you install GitHub for windows and want to from time to time use a
command line then you can do that. It installs
link:https://github.com/dahlbyk/posh-git[Posh Git] which is a command
line git client that will also use the same ssh key and other settings
as the rest of Gihbu For windows.

TODO: Screen shots

=== Mac

There are a number of graphical git tools for the mac. You can of
course download the command line git via homebrew (and probably
should) but if you want to do some things with a graphical client
there are a few free options. 

==== GitHub For Mac

The folks at GitHub, as part of their effort to improve the git
ecosystem have their own Git client for the mac, You can download it
from link:http://mac.github.com/[] or by going to
link:http://www.github.com[] and selecting GitHub for Mac at the
bottom of the page. GitHub for Mac works with Mac OS 10.7 (Lion) and
later. 

Note: you do not need to use GitHub for mac only with GitHub, it will
work with any git repository. So if you host your public projects on
github and your private ones on bitbucket you can use this tool with
both. However some features may only work with GitHub

The GitHub mac client will of course do everything you would expect a
git client to do. It can commit changes, view history, create and
merge branches and so on. 

When you open the GitHub client you are presented with a panel that
lists your repositories. You can select one to work with. If you need
to create a new repository or open one that the client does not know
about you can do that from the file menu. 

image:graphical_git/mac_github/repositories.png[title="Repositories Screen"]


When you select a repository you are presented with a panel with four
buttons on the side, that cover most of the options that you would
want to do. 

The top button, will show the history of the current branch. You can
select a given commit and see the comment as well as what was changed
in that commit. 

image:graphical_git/mac_github/history.png[title="History Screen"]

To commit a set of changes go to the second button. The left hand side
of the panel will show a list of files that have changed. Select the
file or files that you wish to commit, and enter a comment then click
the commit button. If you need to review what was changed in  a given
file that will be shown on the right side. 

image:graphical_git/mac_github/commit.png[title="Commit Screen"]

If you have multiple branches (and in many projects you probably
should) you can work with those branches in the branches tab. Here you
can create a new branch, select which  branch to work with and so
on. You can also publish a branch to the server. 

image:graphical_git/mac_github/branches.png[title="Branches Screen"]

The final tab is the settings tab. From here you can set the remote
origin of a repository. In addition you can setup the _.gitignore_
file 
image:graphical_git/mac_github/settings.png[title="Settings Screen"]

You can also do a push or a pull from the client. to do a push hit
command-P and a pull can be done with Command-Shift-P. The default way
to sync with a server from GitHub for mac is to use the "Sync" button
which will do a push and a pull at once. 

Nicely it will also work with other git clients (as you would expect)
so you can commit changes with eclipse and review them with the GitHub
client. 

